Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number four 55. In this
episode, Scott talks with John Clark
about the rise of citizen
science. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
on the phone I've got
Shondra Clark from Canada. How
are you? I'm doing well.
How about yourself? I am
thrilled. And I'm thrilled to
be talking to you. You
have been involved in several
Canadian space advocacy groups. You've
got a master's in science
and space studies. You are,
you were featured in a
book, I'll call a woman
in space and you are
a citizen scientists. Aren't you?
I am indeed. Yes. It's
a, I'm fairly well rounded
in that respect. And I
like to get to get
my hands dirty with the,
with real stuff whenever I
can. Yeah, absolutely. What does
that mean citizen scientist? Does
that imply that science isn't
something that the average Joe
or Jane can get involved
in for the last maybe
a hundred years or so?
Actually that hasn't been the
case. It's, it's been the
case that there's been a
real professionalization of science and
people haven't really felt like
it's something that they could
do without, you know, several
degrees without specialized training and
so forth. But actually before
we had the professionalization, all
kinds of people were doing
science and just anybody who
had the time or the
money or the interest, and
just went out and explored
the natural world. So to
a certain extent, citizen science
is a return to something
we were doing once before.
So it's a reclaiming of
something that we were maybe
not allowed to do. Yes,
that's right. So citizen science
is something where you can
get involved in a project
and actually do real science.
You might be collecting data,
you might be processing data.
You might be doing some
review of some information for
a group, but it's something
where you can actually get
involved. And it's a little
bit different than some of
the other things you might
think of with public participation
in science, where they call
for study subjects, for example.
So with citizen science, you're
not the study subject, you're
actually the researcher. So there's
no worry about, you know,
being a Guinea pig or
a lab rat in this
case. So are we acting
as, are we the public
Acting as kind of a
mechanical Turk? Is this rote
work that we're doing In
some cases, is it depends
on the project. There's a
wide range of projects that
you can get involved with.
I've got them classified on
my website. I'm starting with
the lowest level where you
can just, you know, open
up your wallet and donate
to a project and make
sure something gets funded. So
for example, something like that
would be@aexperiment.com or you can
actually a fund, a study,
a direct funding of a
study to make sure something
gets researched. Another one would
be Monarch watch.org. And without
when you actually fund the
conservation of a Monarch butterfly.
So that's, that's the first
level. And then you can
get into the second level
stuff. And that's a set
and forget type thing. And
with that, what you can
do is you can download
a client onto your computer
or even your Android phone
called blank, B O L
I N C and a
that sort of Berkeley. And
with this one, you can
have your computer do all
kinds of processing of data.
So for example, there's one
fight malaria at home. And
with that one year you're
processing data about disease, vectors
and cures and, and drugs
and so forth. Some of
your listeners might actually be
familiar with SETI at home,
exact same thing. Distributed computing
is, is the concept behind
that. And then we get
into the more hands on
stuff. And that's what I
like to that's when you
start actually getting involved with
it. And, and so there
are web applications for this.
One of the big players
in this space is called
a Zooniverse and it zooniverse.org.
And with that one, that's
where you start into getting
processing this stuff yourself. So
one of the projects on
there is a solar storm
watch. And with that, when
you get to look at
images of the sun, unfortunately,
you don't need any special
glasses or anything like that.
And you help them identify
solar flares and sunspots and
storms. And by identifying that
you give them the data,
they need to be able
to find out if there
are patterns to solar flares,
if there are patterns to
the solar weather and then
you, then you help them
be able to determine if
there's any way we can
predict this sort of thing.
And there are a number
of different programs on there
like that. Another really good
one on there is called
whale FM. And with that
one, what you can do
is listen to whale song
and see if you can
identify the different patterns in
the songs and see if
you can pick out which
pod that song might, might
belong to with different families
of whales have different songs.
So that's a starts to
get back to your question
a little bit. That's that's
where you get into some
of the road processing of
it. And then actually you
can get into a even
deeper and more involved projects
from there. So you, you
gave the example of looking
for, was it pulse pulsars?
Yes. Yeah. Pulse ours is
another one. Yeah. So, so
how am I qualified to
do that? I mean, you
have a master's in space
studies. I went to a
community college. I feel like
I would up their experiment.
Like I like to be
involved, but I'd hate to
be the one that missed
it or clicked on the
wrong star. Absolutely. That's a
fear for everybody who, who
first gets into this. So
there are two aspects to
this one is that they
have really, really good training.
They provide you with video
training, they provide you with
tutorials. They, they walk you
through everything. They explain the
science to it so that
you know why it is
you're looking for this. They
do explain it in layman's
terms so that you're not
sitting there trying to figure
out, you know, $20 words
or, you know, find out
what it is they're talking
about. So that's the first
part of it. The second
part of it is that
they have all of these
different things broken down into
really, really simple tasks. So
for example, with, with one
called well with the whale,
one, for example, you're just
listening to the sound and
you're not trying to, you
know, retune the sound or
calibrate the sound or you
you're just listening at that
point. So they've, they've got
it all broken out, but
the really important part, and
this is the third part
is that you are not
the only person who's going
to be looking at that
particular data. So, you know,
someone might see that particular
clip from whale FM, or
here at rather four or
five times. So your data
will be checked against the
next guys, which will be
tacked against the next diet
should be checked against the
next day. So even if
you happen to screw up
one, or maybe even you
screw up 20 in a
row before you finally get
it, you know, it all
gets cleaned up as more
and more people look at
the same data. So you're
not going to cause us
to suddenly launch something that
shouldn't be launched or, or
anything like that. It's all
good. So does this mean
that this is something that
I could get kids involved
in? I wouldn't have to
worry about my nine year
old messing up some important
space exploration. You can absolutely
get your kids involved. I
have my own children involved
and they just love this
kind of stuff. There are,
even if you really want
to get your kids hooked
on this stuff, gamified versions
of this kind of thing.
So I've got on my
blog. There's a there's whole
long list called the ultimate
guide to citizen science games,
but on there. So for
example, there's one called click
to cure and it's an
iPad game and you're running
a little spaceship through space.
And every time you run
through a particular part of
the, the game, your, your
spaceship, you're helping to process
data on cancer, cancerous tumors,
and simply by playing the
game. And so there there's
all kinds of ones like
that. There's also another one
called eternal and that's E
T E R N a.
And without one, it's a
beautiful, beautiful puzzle game where
you have a string of
RNA and you're supposed to
try and fold it according
to the rules that they
give you gorgeous games, look
at fun game to play
somewhat addictive. And without when
you're helping to find the
ways that the, the ways
that RNA or ribonucleic acid
can bend and that'll help
us with finding drugs, good
drug targets and good drug
candidates for helping cure diseases.
So your, your kids can
definitely get into it. And
is this, this is, This
may be a fullest question,
but hopefully in citizen science,
there are no foolish questions.
Is this really helping a
scientist? I mean, some of
these are so polished, like,
you know, the, a cell
slider and click to cure
that it almost doesn't feel
like I could be doing
something useful. Like it's just
a really polished PR game.
Am I really providing data
to these? You absolutely are.
If you want to let's,
let's take it up a
notch. Let's go to some
of the stuff where you're
actually out collecting data. So
for a project Noah, they
want you to take your
cell phone out and they
want you to take images
of the flowers and the
insects and the birds and
stuff like that in your
area and upload them to
the website. So with that,
what you're doing is you're
helping scientists understand what animal
and bird populations are flourishing
and where a good example
of how that has actually
changed scientific data. The camel
cricket in the United States, they
recently put out a call
for everybody to see if
they could find camel crickets
in their basements. And as
it turned out, there were
more species than what we
realized and that they had
spread further than what anybody
knew. And this was simply
by getting everybody to go
out and have a look.
So they were actually collecting
data for scientists rather than
just processing it and genuinely
contributing to the, the, the
data that that needed to
be had. And project Noah
at, at, at project noah.org
is extremely polished. You know,
you might, you might think
you're on Instagram. It's, it's
that? Yes, it's, it's a
really gorgeous thing to look
at. And the neat thing
about it too, is that
you can almost get lost
in looking what everybody else
has posted. And you might
even find stuff that you
didn't realize was there was
in your own neck of
the woods. So it seems
like I could take my
kids out into our local
open spaces and have them
really. And once they see
what's going on in project
know, I hopefully that'll inspire
them to, you know, take
well framed, clean photography, and
maybe even identify some of
these flowers and origins. Absolutely.
Yeah. And they can take
a field guide out with
them. I believe also project
Noah has some capacity for
helping you to identify stuff
when you're out in the
field. And even if you
don't know what it is,
once you upload it, somebody,
I mean, the internet is
so big and so huge.
There's, there's going to be
an expert on something somewhere.
So even if you don't
know what it is, you're
looking at, somebody will be
able to help you figure
it out. It's almost overwhelming
though. There's so many of
these different projects. I mean,
if I were homeschooling my
kids, we could spend the
whole year just trying a
different project every week and
we'd still have hundreds of
projects. Yes. There are a
huge number. So you would
have the chance to I,
as it is. I hope
I happen to homeschool my
children. So we do use
this as, as part of
our curriculum. And we've had
a good time going through
some of these things and
each one of them touches
on something different within our
curriculum. And the, and the
nice is because I've got
a, an age range for
my kids. I've got one,
two year old and I've
got a 10 year old
and then two in between,
you can, you can tailor
it. And, and you know,
the two year old can
look at the pictures and
go, Oh wow, that's kinda
cool. Whereas the 10 year
old can start reading the
scientific background of it. And
then I'll send him off
to go look up some
stuff on Wikipedia. And then
the eight year old can
actually do some of the
clicking on the images and
then the five-year-old can do
something else. So you can,
you can spend a lot
of time really digging into
all facets of it. And,
and then the kids feel
really neat because they're actually
doing something that's not just,
you know, replicating the volcano
project for the science fair
kind of thing. It's, it's,
it's not been done before.
They're actually doing something new
for somebody. And you've got
a Kindle book, a short
book called be the change,
saving the world with citizen
science. Would this be a
good place for me to
start figuring out how Involved?
Yeah, absolutely. I'm I made
all the links in there
clickable so that you can
investigate some of these projects.
I have divided them up
in the same way that
I've kind of talked about
here on the, on the
podcast, in terms of, you
know, how you can get
started, how you can, you
know, your level of commitment,
what, what it is you
need to do, how deep
you want to go. And
you can start by, you
know, finding a couple that
you really like and donating,
or you can dive right
in. I'll tell you that
for the, for the homeschoolers,
there's one that is really
cool. It's called shark finder.
And you get sent a
vile of material sediment from
the ocean floor, and you
pick through it to look
for skate and Ray and
shark fossils. And so you
can actually do real time
paleontology at your kitchen at
your kitchen table. We, we
did a similar one. Yeah.
We did a similar one
last year, my kids and
I called Mastodon matrix. Unfortunately
that one's run out of
funding for the time being.
But we were sent a,
a huge bag of dirt
actually from a Mastodon excavation
site. As we had the
microscope out, we had the
tweezers out, we had the
magnifying glass, they sent us
a little data sheet where
you could figure out what
it is you were looking
at. We found something that
we thought actually might be
a Mastodon hair. So they
were very excited about that.
Definitely a lot of shell
fragments without one, what we
were doing was helping them
figure out what the world
was like, you know, 10,
11, thousand years ago, when
mastodons were roaming about in,
in New Jersey. So it gave
them a whole new perspective
on what it was like
to do real science. Well,
it definitely gets them engaged
in the, in the physicality
of it. A lot of
these things are very abstract.
My kids are just now
seven and nine and you
know, a million years ago
is the, you know, the
mid eighties as far as
they're concerned. So when they,
when they get to physically
touch something, it definitely connects
them to science in a
way that didn't. Yeah. Yeah.
It's one thing to have
them do stuff on their
iPad or they're on the
computer. It is quite another
to get them to actually
get out in nature and
sunshine and looking for this
kind of stuff. So it's,
it's a good way to
give your kids a well
rounded experience of the world
When you found this, these
things in the dirt. Are
you, are you expected to
send that back to the
scientist? If you found something
amazing in that, I assume
that it's your responsibility to
send it back. Absolutely. Yeah.
So what we did with
that project is we sorted
everything into a little Ziploc
baggies. So we had a
bag for plant material, a
bag for shell fragments, some
for stone bits, we even
found an algae spores. So
we give that its own
little Ziploc bag. And then
we packed up all the
stuff, even all the stuff
that didn't look like it
was important and shipped all
that back so that the
scientists will be able to,
you know, take all of
the little specimens out and
then put the, the rest
of the dirt back. And
presumably maybe even have it
looked at again to see
what else, what other stuff
we missed. Cause I mean,
inevitably when you've got little
kids around, you're not going
to catch it all. There's
only so much patients, some
of the little ones have,
That's such a, that's such
a, I want to say
a metaphor, but just the
idea of like, well, some
people are getting Netflix, other
people are getting dirt that
they can sort through. You
know what I mean? There's
this, there's this metaphor on
what we're doing, like as
a Western culture right now.
Like why aren't we doing
things like this more at
a larger scale, you know,
for every one bag of
dirt filled with Mastodon hairs,
there's probably 10,000 DVDs being
sent out with episodes of,
you know, Nickelodeon shows. Yeah.
Yeah. The sir. But the
neat thing about living in
this age though, is that
something like the Mastodon matrix
is possible. One of the
reasons why citizen science is
becoming a big thing now,
and wasn't so much when
I first started looking at
this about 10 years ago
is that the internet has
enabled so much of this
kind of thing. It's allowed
for a site like project
Noah. We put together fairly
cheaply, fairly quickly, the, the,
the templates and stuff like
that, you can get to
set up a website to
make it look really gorgeous.
All of that kind of
stuff is, is orders of
magnitude cheaper than it was
10 years ago. And even
it's even the case that
more and more people are
interested in this kind of
thing, because we're so connected
these days. And we're starting
to realize, Hey, what happens
here in the United States affects
the kids over in China.
And it affects the people
in Japan. You know, it's
even the case that when
we had that massive tsunami
there in Japan a few
years ago, I'm a citizen
science project came out of
that because someone said, Hey,
this is something I want
to be able to do
something about, and I don't
want to just send over
money. So this fellow got
together with some of his
other programmers and friends and,
and hardware specialists. And they
put together radiation sensors that
they strapped everybody's car in,
in Japan. It was called,
I believe Safecast. Yeah. And
so they now have this
roving network of radiation sensors
right within the, the area
that Fukushima was a where
Fukushima is having problems still
to this day. And you
know, they've, they've got this
network so people can get
real time data. They can
get information that they don't
have to depend on their
government for, which is another,
another big thing. And they
were able to do something
just because the tools are
there and so cheap. And
if anybody's got a little
bit of initiative, they can
go and do something That
is such a, there's so
many buzz words that plug
into that as far as
like big data and the
internet of things, you know,
if these kinds of sensors
were already in our iPhones
or in our cars and
the privacy concerns could be
allayed. One could ask the
world questions, you know, like
give me a heat map
of radiation in this area.
Or, you know, whether it
be the example you gave
of radiation, you know, of
course we're doing things like
that with traffic now, weather
data at a, at a,
both a micro and a
macro level could be, could
be explored. We're starting to
get into that a little
bit with all the, the
mobile phones and so forth.
Even with the basic sensors
they do have, I'll give
you two examples. One is
called the loss of the
night. And with that one,
you take it outside. You
have a look and see
what stars you can see
in your local area and
compare that to what you
should be able to see
on the screen. And that
one gives them an idea
of what light pollution is
like in various spots in,
in North America and all
around the rest of the
world. Another one is kind
of like four square for
Junkin and litter. It's called
Murray Marine debris finder. And
with that one in, I
believe this one is set
in California mainly, but I'm
sure it'll expand, but people,
when they see junk and
trash near waterways, they can
go on this app and
they can click what they
see and, you know, check
in. And that will give
the people who look after
these waterways, a good indication
of where they need to
go. Instead of just going
to a waterway that doesn't
happen to have anything in
it and waste the time
and money to go out
there. They can go to
where there's a problem and
go clean it up and
spend a lot less time
and money doing. So all
kinds of applications with that
sort of thing, just with
mobile apps. Sure. Do you
think that this is, is
hitting or is even close
to hitting mainstream? Cause I
feel like, you know, for
every cool project that the
one you just described, there
are a million geocasher is
out there that are just
leaving chotsky in boxes and
then looking for Trotsky inboxes,
like they're not actually accomplishing
anything. There's there's, there's, we're,
we're coming up to, I
think, more public awareness of
the citizen science movement. In
the last two years, I
have seen more mainstream coverage
of citizen science things than
I have in the, in
the previous eight years. And
I think there is real
scope for tapping into the
geocaches for tapping into star
Trek fans, just as a,
as a, an example. I
mean, you have all these
people who spend so much
time and so much money
going to star Trek conventions,
and, and learning how to
speak, cling on. And, and,
and you know, that that's
a lot of fun and
I understand why people do
it. It's a way to
get social. It's a way
to meet likeminded people. And,
you know, we don't always
have to be serious all
the time, but there is
obviously a huge untapped reservoir
of creative energy clay Shirky
calls it cognitive surplus. And
we, we have all this
brain power and far more
spare time than we're willing
to admit. And even if
we can just start tapping
into a small percentage, that
all kinds of things could
be done and we can
make real signals, You can
progress. That's a really great
way to put it. I
mean, we do, you know,
as much as there are
many people are struggling and
there are difficulties and there
are big problems in the
world at the same time,
there are people in basically
anyone listening to this podcast
and anyone who has a
mobile phone that have more
time on their hands than
perhaps that they realize. And
that can be put to
extremely good use with just
a little bit of focus.
Yep. Absolutely. And one of
the things too, I just
read a book called the
second machine age. I forget
the author's name, but they
talk about how technology progresses
and movements, progress, you know,
slowly incrementally to start with.
And then all of a
sudden they hit this critical
mass and they're doing all
kinds of things. And it's,
it's kind of like, you
know, the old story about
someone putting a penny on
a chess board and then
they double it the next
day. And then they double
it the next day and,
you know, four pennies, eight
pennies, 16 pennies. And it,
it, it seems like such
a small amount, but then
by the time you, you
know, you start doubling that
again and again, and again,
by the time you get
down to the end of
the chess board, you've got
thousands and thousands of dollars
on the board, and it's
not until you hit that
critical point in the doubling
that, that, that suddenly starts
to explode. And we're coming
to that point, I think
now that the famous tipping
point where we're, we're going
to start to see some
huge progress in a lot
of different fronts Implying that
the singularity is around and,
and, and of course then
Skynet or just around the,
Yeah, they may well be
The second machine age is
Erik Brynjolfsson and annual ma
Andrew McAfee. And it happens
actually just to be the
number one book in business
development on Amazon right now.
So definitely someone people should
check that out. One of
the things that I wanted
to take a look at
was you write a number
of articles for popular science,
and recently wrote one about
an organization called the open
space agency. And I wanted
to ask someone who knew
about space and understood the,
you know, kind of the
larger system that you, that
you understand is it becoming
cheaper to, and as such
feasible to get into space,
it seems like we got
tomorrow's a lot cheaper than
we got to the moon.
Yeah. I mean, obviously the
big projects where we're launching
probes and, and launching rockets
and so forth, those are
still pretty expensive. It's still
costs in the order of,
you know, $10,000 a pound
to get something into space
that said, we have a
lot more people applying their
brains to it. We have,
now India's trying to send
things up. China is trying
to send things up. It's
not just down to the
Americans and the Russians. And
also because certain components of
space exploration, like the sensors,
like the hardware, like the
information about how to build
this kind of thing, those
things are becoming cheaper and
far more widely available. So
you're going to see a
lot more attempts to, to
do this by private citizens.
This, this, this in itself
might cause some problems. If
we're all trying to launch
something the same time, we
might have a few traffic
issues, but you know, we're,
we're getting to the point
where yes, it's becoming cheaper
to do it. And I
think it's not going to
be the sole provenance of,
of very well funded government
governments. And one of the
examples that you gave in
your article was that bringing
the price of entry to
exploring space as an amateur
astronomer is potentially coming down
by an order of magnitude
or a few orders of
magnitude people putting together fairly
reasonable devices for doing observations
in space with, with mobile
phones and raspberry pies. Yeah.
One of the things that
open space agency, one of
their first projects is to
build a, a astronomy quality
telescope and then open source
the plans so that, you
know, if anybody, you know,
obviously back in the day
when somebody wanted to go
and build a telescope, even
in Kepler's time or Galileo's
time, they would have to
go to a specific, you
know, specialist in and to
someone to grind the lenses
and someone to do this.
And somebody that these days
with the advent of things
like three D printing and
where you can just send
a way for quality lenses
from a supply shop and,
and this, that, and the
other, anybody with a, you
know, the slightest bit of
tinkering ability should be able
to put something together that,
that works pretty well. And,
you know, even if they
don't get it right, the
first time that there's communities
building up around these things
where they can say, Hey,
it does this, or whatever
they wrong, or why is
it showing everything the wrong
way up or, or whatever.
And they'll be able to
get some help with that
kind of thing. Just like
with any other community these
days. Yeah. I've said it
in, in previous shows that
I feel like we are
abstracting on the shoulders of
giants. You know, like people
don't even realize how much
had to happen in the
world and in science for
there to be a 41
megapixel CCD on a, on
a consumer grade camera. Now
the idea that someone can
plug those things in together
with an Arduino. And, and
now I have, you know,
a prosumer quality device that
I can look at space
with abstinence. Yeah. One of
the things I like to
do, and when I tear
down a computer or, or,
you know, go to put
some new component in or
whatever is, and I take
a second and I look
at everything that in there,
and you think about all
the knowledge that had to
go before you to put
that together and metallurgy and
plastics and, and electronics and
physics and, and everything that
had to go together into
something. You know, even if
you just look inside your,
your smartphone and that's something
that everybody has in their
pockets, even increasingly in third
world countries, these are, these
are rapidly being adopted. We
have more power in the
Palm of our hands than
the one actually took us
to the moon back in
19 in the 1960s. So
it's just incredible how this
is, has changed in the
last few years, Which brings
me again, back to my
point of why we're not
in the moon right now,
it really comes down less
to processing power and more
to the physicality of moving
a pound of anything or
a kilo of anything out
of orbit. Yes. Yes. And
it also comes down to
too political will. I think
one of the reasons why
we went to went in
his face in the first
place is of the cold
war, possibly. If, you know,
if the Russians hadn't chucked,
Sputnik up there and scared
everybody to bits, we might
not be as far ahead
on that. Then, you know,
we, we are now and
we, we might've actually been
there earlier than what would
have been otherwise had there
not been a cold war,
hard to say, you know,
you could write all kinds
of cool alternative history stories
about that, but, you know,
That's the way it is.
Do you find it more
amazing that we made it
there with the technology of
the time or more amazing
that we made it back?
Definitely that we made it
back. The fact that we
were able to put so
many people up there that,
you know, it, it became
commonplace and it's even the
case that we, we put
so many shuttles up that,
you know, people would say,
Oh yeah, okay. The shuttle
launch. Okay. Big deal. You
know, it, it became such
a non-news event, unfortunately, until
we had a couple of
tragedies on that score. It's
good that we got to
the point where it was
a, a standard thing, but
it's also sad that we
lost kind of the, the
magic and the all, and
the wonder of that, that
era. I really wish we
did have that because I
mean, we not had a
moon landing in 40 plus
years now, so yeah, it's,
it's, I wish we had
more of that. It gives
people a bigger sense of
themselves, Bigger picture. What can,
what can my listeners do?
What can I do as
more of a software person
in the, in the, in
the context of citizen science,
perhaps, maybe an open source,
citizen science, absolutely. A couple
of things you can do.
First of all, I, a
lot of these projects are
looking for people to donate
time and programming experience. And
a lot of these things
are university funded, so that
they're always looking for help.
That way, if you're interested
in something, starting something on
your own, there is a,
an open source framework for
this called PI Basa. And
you can find that@pybossa.com. So
there's a framework for doing
crowd sourcing for citizen science,
for any number of things.
And you can write your
own program, you can start
collecting data, you can get
people involved. So that's a
good way for anybody with
some programming skill to, to
really get into it. Sure.
So it looks like pie.
Basa is like you say,
it's a, it's a platform
for one to crowd source.
So if I know a
scientist or I know someone
who wants to do science,
they can use PI Bossar
to crowd source things. And
if I know about software,
I can get involved with
a project like this, make
some pull requests and, and
maybe make tools that They
don't already have. Yep, exactly.
They're also using it. If
you scroll down a bit
on that site and it
talks a little bit about
civic hacking, that's another application
for this, where we're trying
to improve our cities. A
really generic example of how
that could be used is
like a pothole reporter put
together something for your local
municipality to have them be
able to report in, on
potholes in the area and
have your local municipality spend
less time, you know, searching
for the things and more
time finding out which ones
are the priority and which
ones are really getting under
people's axles and, and bugging
them, you know, there there's
all kinds, stuff like that.
It's also more and more
people are using this kind
of thing for activism. I'm
sure a lot of your
listeners are familiar with movie
Erin Brockovich, or at least
heard about it. Imagine if
the kind of tools that
we now have available for
doing water sampling for doing
air testing for doing any
of that kind of thing,
we're available to an activist
like Erin Brockovich, how much
we could push back when
things like spills and air
pollution and dumping happen, you
could, you can find, you
don't have to rely on
a testing agency where you,
you might doubt whether they're
actually on your side or
providing you with the real
data. You could go get
it yourself, all kinds of
applications available for, for that
kind of stuff at your
website, citizen science center.com on
the right hand side. I
really like the section. How
can I get involved? Because
you've broken it down into
levels. And it's basically, you
know, this is my words,
you know, it's levels of
how much do I want
to get off my butt?
You know, level one, donate,
you know, level to install
this, set it and forget
it. And then all the
way up to levels, five
and six, where I actually
have to leave the house
really like your, your six
levels of citizen science. Thank
you. As one of the
reasons. I mean, because there
are so many projects and
more coming out pretty much
every day, it's, it's hard
for anybody to know where
to start and, and it
can seem very overwhelming. So
I wanted to break it
down and in a way
that people could, you know,
dip their toes in a
little bit, maybe play with
it a little bit and
try and go from there.
And, and then, you know,
you can work your way
up. And one of the
questions that does come up
to when, when people are
looking for this as well.
Okay, fine. But what's in
it for me, apart from,
you know, being able to
tackle some of the problems
that are then going to
be problems for my kids
and my grandkids. So if
you're, if you're looking for
that little extra motivation, some
of these projects, they have
leaderboards and scoreboards, just like
you would with any of
the games that you play,
Farmville and all that kind
of good stuff on Facebook,
they have leaderboards and, and
score, score, keeping that way.
Some of the papers that
are produced do actually list
all the participants. Some of
the smaller projects, obviously some
of the bigger projects where
they have hundreds of thousands
of people that would be
somewhat impractical, but they do
get credit on the website.
And for some of the
astronomy based ones, you might
even get naming rights. If
you happen to discover something
like an extra solar planet
or a pulsar or a
galaxy, you have, you know,
you may be able to
see your name in lights
quite literally. So again, get
out there and give it
a go. That was very,
very cool. I would encourage
everyone to check out citizen
science center.com and all of
the really great resources that
are up there. You've got
books, your book, and others
that people can take a
look at it. You can
subscribe for free and get
involved in citizen science. Thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. My pleasure. I
hope, I hope I tweak
the interest of a lot
of people out there. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.